All right that's like 24 of the time.
All right welcome to my talk.
I'm presenting Crowdsourcing Research Synthesis on AT Pro
: Envisioning an Inclusive Future.
And I'm Jay Patel from the University of Maryland.
So I want to preface this by the motivation for this
lightning talk.
Back in summer 2025 I was doing my first systematic review.
So who's familiar with the idea of a systematic review in
research?
Okay who's familiar with the idea of any kind of review
research synthesis?
Very good okay.
So a systematic review is a very systematic way of sort of
assessing how much evidence there is out there in the broader research
literature.
And that involves four key steps which is searching for relevant pre
prints and papers through keyword searches and natural language searches.
Screening for relevant reports so from all the papers that you
search for, which ones are relevant to your questions, and
appraising or evaluating the study quality.
After appraising for study quality you might drop off filter
out a few more articles.
And then when you do that you'll then synthesize the
evidence that you have into some sort of prose which is suitable
for publication.
So this is what I've been working on for the past
year.
And the question that I was really trying to answer was how
suitable are large language models for assessing research reports.
So as I was doing this I noticed a few recurring problems
that are not exactly novel but I really felt them in my
bones.
One is just that it's very slow to do this.
It takes about one to two days to read a paper very
deeply and to be able to say something smart about that.
There are many such citations for that claim.
It's also very tedious after you learn it, after you
go to the first dozen or so papers.
And if you want evidence of that you can just go to
me because I've done this you know hundreds of times.
This is actually a very costly procedure.
So if you have a trained graduate student and maybe one other
person working on it, it takes quite a lot of money
.
And there are only a few citations for this sort of
thing but estimates range between fifty and a hundred and forty one
thousand dollars USD.
Actually in pharmacology or pharma companies it'll cost about
a hundred and forty one thousand per systematic review.
So that's quite a lot.
You know and sadly this is also an error prone sort of
thing.
Ninety three percent of systematic reviews have at least one error
in the search process.
About fifty nine percent of the sampled ones have at least
one error in the extraction process extracting key details of methods and
analyses.
And then when it comes to appraisal or evaluating the
study quality, well there are very many problems and I would
call that foobar or I guess you know that acronym
.
And then there's also a number of other problems like you
use very often small homogeneous teams which limits the quality of your
systematic review.
Ideally use very large heterogeneous teams so they could get through
the work more quickly.
Tackle the problem from multiple frames using different kinds of knowledge
, different kinds of skills, and use different connections to make
sure you have a really great product at the end of it
.
And even more problematically, many of these systematic reviews because
they take so long are dead upon arrival.
They're rarely updated after publication and very troublesome to maintain even
when you have a fancy sort of living web page.
So what we would ideally have is you know solutions to these
four key problems, volume and velocity.
We would increase the speed at which we do reviews so that
they take weeks not years.
We would improve the veracity or accuracy and I propose we
do that with crowdsourcing, increasing the team size and ensuring
that certain team members are always engaged with error detection and error
correction.
We would hopefully increase the diversity of the different perspectives and contributors
on our teams.
That would allow us to reframe things, make suggestions,
make interesting connections and then also have living systematic reviews which helps
with providing timely data to people who might benefit from that data
.
And we kind of do this thing already with open source software
development right.
So how do we do this?
Do we use some kind of shiny app with R, open
science repos?
Do we use like journal specific tools or journalware?
This question has been asked on Blue Sky actually quite recently by
this user who asked what is the best platform to host something
like this?
Meaning a living systematic review.
Is it shiny?
Is it a website?
Well you know one other user had this interesting idea of a
wiki which is a more dynamic approach where multiple researchers can
edit and attach new evidence and reviewers and then various other people
can make approvals, rejections and modifications.
So something like Wikipedia but with additional guardrails.
The nice thing is that the ATProto system is kind
of like a full-ish stack right now.
We have all the sort of necessary tooling to do an MVP
.
So suppose you have a bunch of research posters, a bunch
of preprints, a bunch of fully polished papers.
And then you sort of discourse graph them with their questions,
claims and evidence.
And push those data into symbol collections and margin annotations.
Then you could probably layer that on to some kind of UI
where users can validate the different extracted discourse graph nodes.
Agree and then publish that into a leaflet blog post
which recently has been working on creating sort of living documents,
living posts.
So if we do this, you know, I think the
near-term goal could be to leverage the existing apps,
create the MVP.
Hopefully that could be done within a few weeks to months.
In the medium term, I think it'd be cool to
query data across multiple crowdsource reviews and scaffold also what's
called primary research which would be not reviews but primary experiments,
surveys, surveys, interviews.
And in the very long term, it'd be very nice
if we could build interesting visual dashboards and data stories that
would appeal more to the public, more for public engagement rather
than just creating, you know, typical research reports for scientists
.
So a fair number of things that we can do and I
'd like you to kind of get your help with this.
So if you're a builder, can you help me build
the missing pieces?
If you're a scholar or someone else, you know,
can you help me test drive the MVP, spread the word
?
And I don't know who else is out here except a
builder or a scholar or advocate but anyone else, you know
, you can also help test drive the MVP, spread the
word, get involved.
I would really kind of love your advice here.
I'd like to thank my research mentor Joel Chan for conceptual
guidance here and then Ronan for also motivating this talk and
bringing me out here.
And finally, I'm available on ORCID and Blue
Sky.
Thank you.
Thank you, Jay.
Questions, anyone?
Maybe I'll ask a question about the, yeah,
just comparison, like what's your sort of mental model for
where app proto fits in versus like AI?
How do you see the two combining?
I'm agreeable to both approaches.
I haven't thought about AI as much because I think simply
increasing the team size would be such a great benefit to the
problem at hand.
I know that for systematic reviews, there's an incredible amount
of work being done right now for screening papers, extracting bits
of questions, claims, and evidence, and also doing the
synthesis.
I agree more for using it for search, screening, and
extracting questions, claims, and evidence.
A little bit less so for synthesis because that's way more
complicated and way more fun.
As an amateur, I've tried to sort of do that
myself.
And it's not been as successful.
But certainly, I think, you know, search, in
fact, I couldn't have done part of my systematic review
without using some AI-assisted elements into my workflow.
It really would not have been possible.
So I strongly advocate for using the right AI programs to help
with search and screening, although my systematic review is so small
that I can do the screening myself manually.
And then when it comes to appraisal, I have
a certain way of doing it that I like.
And so I feel comfortable just doing that myself.
But I'm open to anyone who might be able to sort
of automate custom-built checklists and things using some sort
of AI agent.
So that is, yeah, it's quite doable.
Cool.
Anyone else?
You mentioned using high-quality LLMs.
Did you benchmark maybe like medium-level or low-quality
ones?
I did not do the, for the systematic review that I
was conducting, I did not do the benchmarking myself.
I was merely reviewing the studies that others had done, the
benchmarking experiments that others have done.
And so what I noted from that, which is actually helpful
for this sort of meta project, is that, you know
, a smattering of results, the more you focus these
foundation models, the better they do.
Using sort of, you know, fine-tuned data
, better prompts, better context engineering, those things all sorts
of help.
But I think none of these models achieve, you know,
expert human performance on every trial.
So it would really be beneficial to have humans and AI agents
work together across the systematic review process.
Certainly, I see them being very useful for appraisal
, right?
Let's say you have a long checklist that's useful for
evaluating the methods of analyses.
You should, you should consider certain LLMs, I
think.
That's perfectly fine.
Yeah.
Any more questions?
Maybe a quick one while Sophie sets up or we'll just
move to the next talk.
Okay.
Well, let's thank Jay again.